from every five years. Well, that's right, but
most of us don't have enough courage to do so.
That's the truth of that matter.
Why did you choose to leave ONR? Well, it came about
in 1965.
Paul Feig came down to see me in Washington and
asked me if I was interested in coming up here and
working at Woods Hole. And I met with he and Noel
McLean, who was chairman of the board at that time.
After meeting with him a little while, I told him
no. I was happy and O and R. I didn't think I wanted to
leave at that time. The
reason I was doing something in ONR that I thought
made a lot of sense, and I wanted to kind of follow
through. And the problem that, again, Hugh
McClellan, who was in ONR working for me at the
time, and I went over to see Walter. Again, we're
talking to Walter Monk on this. saying, gee, well,
what are the experiments that's equivalent to
what ARPA is doing on this large array they're
putting in? We ought to be looking at experiments
in oceanography that are really pushing the
frontiers ahead. We
got to thinking that we really need to understand
the circulations of the oceans better.
that there ought to be a fairly comprehensive
program that looked at currents over fairly large
areas of the ocean with current meters and so on
that had acoustics in it that you could compare it
with what the acoustics paths were and look at it
acoustically and just look at a bigger piece of the
ocean than the little ways that, you know,
Essentially, at that time, all the measurements
were made just at one spot. So you had to just take a
bigger piece of the ocean and look at it different
ways. And so I was kind of getting that started. And
it was a new thrust. And I wanted to see it through.
And I was working a little bit on trying to
reorganize oceanography in the Navy. So
I was enjoying life in Washington. didn't think
much about leaving. After that, that summer, Gil
McClellan and I came up to Woods Hole and spent a
week up here talking
to people about doing this, and it looked like
Woods Hole was kind of the logical place to do it
because there were more people interested in it
here than anywhere else. And I brought my wife up
with me at the time. We kind of got to like it up here
the week we spent here. I asked her whether she
liked it so much she'd like to live up here and she
said she thought she could. So I went back and
thought about it a little more and called Paul up.
This must have been nearly a year after he asked me
to come up here and I said, are you still interested
in having me come up here? He said, sure. So I
decided to come up. This was a little bit of a
personal thing for me, too, because I'd gotten
divorced and remarried about a year or so earlier.
And I think it made me, I'd stayed in Washington
long enough that things had settled down after
that period, but then I felt like I'd like to kind of
start over again somewhere else. And I think that
all had a part in the decision to come up here.
starting out sort of a new life and a new career all
at the same time. And Woods Hole looked like a nice
place to do it. There were a lot of opportunities
here and a great group of people to work with. And I
had a chance to follow through on the kind of
program that I was interested in there in the Navy.
Although it's not my particular field of interest
doing work, I was interested in the program.
buoy program that is up here developed out of that
and it's just made major strides in understanding
the oceans. Did, did you, except for this idea,
what other sorts of ideas did you try to bring to
Woods Hole when you came as an administrator? Oh, I
uh, I think uh, I, the main thing I think I thought
was the uh, the kind of feeling that uh, that you
really had to be doing the best science no matter
what you're doing here, and that you really worked
on quality at all times. You're getting the best
people here, and we strive for that. It's
something the institution has always done, tried
to get the very best people here and develop a good
research program no matter in which area it's in.
followed through a little bit on geophysics since
I've been up here, and I used to go to sea more often
than I do now, because I still have an interest in
geophysics, and I think I still have an impact on
the programs up here. As a matter of fact, I spent
most of the morning discussing some of our
programs that we're going to do, and I think I have
some input to shaping these, and although I don't
take part in them myself, I feel like I have fairly
good input into deciding what's going on or
helping decide what's going on. Well, I have a
couple of questions, one of which you can ignore
and one which I don't want you to ignore. First of
all, it seems to me Woods Hole stresses more than
other institutions the idea of students going to
see. Is that deliberate?
Yes. I think the thing that we stress and going to
see is only part of it. We take what I think is
probably a little bit different look at the
graduate students than other places. We feel very
keenly that it's a transition from classroom
learning to doing research on your own
independently. We like to get the person involved
in working in the laboratory on problems of his own
and going to see solving these and so forth.
de-emphasize the classroom training. We really
want the guy, when he gets his degree, to be able to
go off on his own and do a piece of research in some
reasonably short period of time. Now, Scripps was
good at doing this when I was there, but it took the
average guy seven years to get through the
business. You had a lot of courses and so on, and
then you went to C. We're trying to do the same thing
in a reasonable time that's normal in graduate
schools. You know, four years is probably, four to
five years must be a fairly normal period for going
from the BS to the PhD.
What we've done is cut down the amount of class work
and got people really doing research, and that
means going out to sea, getting involved with
problems, getting your feet wet in this business,
and knowing what research is, running programs. I
think our students that have come out here are,
very good, and I don't think they lack any of the
basic skills that they get in other places. It's
just a different emphasis, I think, on teaching.
It's one of teaching them more pragmatically the
kind of things that they're going to be doing when
they get out of school. They aren't going to
continue going to classes when they're out of
school. They're going to be faced with working in a
laboratory somewhere and doing research. Was
that the question you wanted me to ignore? That's
the question I wanted you to answer. I'm going to
ask you a follow-up question on that too, but
another question which you can ignore. Many of the
older oceanographers, that is, I don't mean
particularly in age exclusively, I mean those
people who came through in earlier time in
oceanography regardless of age, felt as if the sea
experience was essential to be an oceanographer,
identification with the environment. Do you feel
that this is a necessity? Oh, absolutely. I'm one
of the older ones. I'll go a little further than
that. I think it's not only essential to go to sea,
but I think an oceanographer's got to have a broad
base of understanding that is beyond his own
specialization.
I feel strongly that he ought to know something
about geology, the physical oceanography,
biology, chemistry, and so forth, that this is
just part of your education to be an
oceanographer, to be able to converse in these
other fields and know something about it. I'm
afraid a lot of the places that teach oceanography
now gets very highly specialized, and I include
ourself among this. Our physical oceanographers
here think it's a waste of time to take any biology
or geology, and they want them to just take the
advanced math courses that they need. And a
student only has a limited amount of time.
Nonetheless, we feel that even these guys that are
just taking the math courses ought to go to sea. And
you have to have some sort of feeling with the data
that you're working with and the accuracy.
If you're working just with numbers all the time or
in the lab and you don't go to sea, I think you just
have the wrong feel for it. Now, I also think that
Woods Hole, probably more so than any other place,
is an experimental place where people go to sea,
more people here go to sea than probably any other
oceanographic institution. That's the way we do
things here. Everybody expects to go to sea.
That's the way we do oceanography. Scripps is a
much more highly theoretical group where a lot of
people that are sitting in the labs don't go to sea
as much. It's a different way of doing things now.
I'm not saying one way is better than the other, but
our way of doing it is the experimental way of going
to sea. You know, we have a number of people that
have grown up here that have no formal educations.
Two of our department chairmen don't have their
Ph.D.
And two others that I know of that are here have
received some of the highest awards in
oceanography and have no graduate training. So
they've just learned on-the-job training type of
thing. And they're very good. They're just
first-rate. And I think that's something... that
it's difficult to do now, even here, but in the past
it was difficult to do other places. Woods Hole was
a place where people came and were interested in
going to see, went to see, and became
oceanographers. Yeah, this is still not the
question, but it looks to me like academic
training and institutional organization works
against your theory. It's almost as if everything
in the academic world, including your own
institution, is becoming more rather than less
specialized. Oh, I think you're right on that, and
a number of us don't agree with that, but we don't
prevail either. I think, as a matter of fact, I
think the institution is very nearly 50-50 split
on this, and what we do is let each group kind of go
its own. The physical oceanographers have tended
to be very narrow. Some of the others tend to be much
broader. And I'd like to encourage the broadness,
but we don't force it on anybody. We have classes
open to everybody. We say on their exams they're
going to be responsible for knowing this, but they
don't have to take courses now. I went to school at
Scripps, and all the courses in the basic subjects
were mandatory there. I would much prefer that
here, and a number of other people would prefer it
here. Mostly people that are graduates of
Scripps, I might add, feel strongly this way. But
some of the other people here feel very strongly
that you want to keep it narrow.
So we've got kind of an in-between. course on that,
and I think it's probably a healthy course.
There's arguments for both sides on this. The time
is limited, and whether you give a guy a broad
general education or you specialize in which is
the best way to train him in order that he can
compete in today's market, I'm not sure. In any
case, going to sea broadens a person, so that's a
real advantage to get them out at sea. And I don't
know whether you've had a chance to talk to any of
our students here. No. We have a great group of
students, and I'm sorry you didn't get to talk to
Fran Shepard while he was here, or maybe you have
talked to him. I've not talked to him. I'm going to
try to find him at Scripps in November. Because he
met with our students, and he told me he thought it
was a great group of students here. He was really
impressed by it. Did you have any problems making,
doing your tenure here? Did you have any problems
making it? what amounts to not a major shift, I
don't mean to imply that, but certainly a movement
to the left, where you turned from what had been
primarily a research institution into one that
was a combination teaching research
institution? Oh, yes. This has not come easy at
all. This was just taking place when I came to Woods
Hole, and that was essentially under one of the
conditions I came that we would push in that
direction of making it an educational as well as a
research institution. Surprisingly, there was
objection within the Navy to see us go. They
preferred to see us continue just being solely a
research. However, we had a special committee of
our trustees set up to look at the question. They
decided that we ought to get involved formally in
education.
We made this decision. had our charter changed to
allow us to give a degree. We have had students here
through the whole history of the institution, but
usually they were somebody else's students,
Brown's or Harvard's or MIT's or something. And we
wanted a group that—we wanted to make sure that
they'd continue coming here, because there were
new centers of oceanography being set up
everywhere. We were afraid that each of these
schools would set up their own groups and we'd end
up with no students here. And students are just the
lifeblood of any research organization. They're
the new ideas and the enthusiasm that comes in.
And so, in essence, what we wanted to do was have a
mechanism that would ensure that we had students,
had our charter changed, We decided about that
stage of the game that it made a lot of sense to join
with MIT in a joint program, which has been
successful. And they had their charter changed at
the same time, so we could both give a single degree
jointly. And our student has grown up to, we have
about 80 at the present time. And it's a very
healthy, it didn't come without pains. A lot of the
older staff members objected to it, still object
to it, and won't participate. Very few of the
younger people object to it, and they're the ones
that are most active in it. So, in the long run,
it'll all wash out and nobody will notice this
transition. So, and I suspect that's, that's Paul
Fye's major accomplishment since being director
is getting the education program. I think he would
probably think that, too. It's going to be the one
that will have the most lasting effect on the
institution. Well, your question. What
direction is your research field going? What do
you think is going to be the major problem that your
research field will have to handle in the future?
The major scientific problem? The major
scientific problem. Oh, I think... the major
scientific program that is facing the
geologists, geophysicists right now is
essentially the nature of the driving mechanism
of the seafloor spreading plate tectonics.
We know a good deal about the upper layers of the
earth, the sediments and the crust of the earth.
beginning to get interested in the deeper parts,
how the crust in the lithosphere and the
athenosphere, which are the deeper layers in the
earth, change from younger crust out to older
crust, and when it goes down into a trench, what
happens to it there? Is there a transition
between, there is a transition between that
oceanic and continental. Is one eventually
transformed into the other, or what? It's this
whole problem of understanding the deeper layers
of the Earth and how they change with age, and the
comparison of the oceanic with the same layers in
the oceanic with the continental areas. And these
have a multitude of ramifications to them in that
if you understand the nature as to what's
happening and the mechanisms that's driving all
of these, it gives you a much better feeling for
where you look for resources in terms of either
minerals or petroleum and so on. Already the
seafloor spreading has paid off on this and the
whole work. I remember the first conference I went
to sometime ago in Princeton where we got a bunch of
oil companies together with a bunch of scientists
talking about seafloor spreading and how it
affects where you look for petroleum. And at that
time, the petroleum companies weren't really
much interested in that. They could cite a few
examples where the wells off Nova Scotia, I guess,
corresponded with the wells off the counterpart
in North Africa or something like that, where they
pulled apart.
But there hadn't been much work. Now I think all the
oil companies are well aware of the whole theory of
plate tectonics, and it's a guiding factor in
where they look for petroleum.
I think that's a major thrust, is going to be
understanding the nature of the
dynamics of what's driving the lithosphere. And I
suspect that's going to be difficult in coming,
because we have no direct way of getting
measurements on these. It's going to have to all be
done by indirect measurements, at least in the
foreseeable future.
But then that's the way seafloor spreading came
about. It was all indirect measurements that
really discovered it. And then the drilling came
along and it just confirmed all of these
hypotheses that were put forward. Then you begin
to get direct samples from down there, and then you
could make some measurements to test out what you
thought was right.
What do you intend to do? In the future? Do you
intend to move back into research? Well, I'd like
to. On the other hand, I think I'd find it very
difficult to keep up with some of the younger
people. They're awfully bright. There's nothing
I'd rather do than that. I worry about how I might be
able to compete with them, that they have
different skills. New groups come along. I've not
followed the literature as closely as I'd like to.
It'd be a major job to get back into it. I do hope to
get a little more involved in research than I am
now.
As I said, I've been here 12 years, essentially
doing what I'm doing now, and I think I'm getting a
little stale at it, and the job's suffering,
because I am getting a little stale at it. I ought to
be thinking of doing something else. I I just don't
have in mind what right now. I take it, though, that
you foresee the remainder of your career here at
Woods Hole. Is that fair to say? Well, I don't see
any other alternatives at this time. I suspect the
deciding factor on that will be if something comes
along that's interesting enough to attract me
somewhere else. Fair enough. Now, the last series
of questions I have are sort of general questions,
which I'd like for you to make a comment on. If you
were to give advice to a young student, a student of
science who wanted to become an oceanographer,
what would you tell him to work in?
What particular field? What particular field?
I don't know. I guess one could answer that either
from what you think the opportunities are or what
your own biases are in this.
I think I would urge that whoever was to get
interested in oceanography ought to have a good
solid background in math and physics, no matter
what field they use. getting into. I think this is
just sort of a fundamental thing that they should
have. Now, there are a lot of interesting things
going on in the chemistry and certainly the
geology and geophysics. I find a lot of
challenging things still going on there. The
physical oceanography is interesting. The one
area that I wouldn't recommend people to get into,
and that's only because there are so many people in
it, is biology. For some reason, biology attracts
more people than the other fields. And there are
more biologists competing with one another. It's
not that the field isn't interesting or
challenging. If I were advising a young person, I
just would advise him to avoid that unless he has
some extreme interests or talents in biology. And
there's no doubt that anybody who's good in any of
these fields will make their way.
I suspect the field of oceanography that's going
to do the most in the future is what one might call
engineering or applied. It's the untapped area.
I think what I mean by this is essentially taking
all the knowledge that's gained from the physical
oceanographer, the chemists, the biologists,
geologists, and so on, and translating these
things into useful ways of using the oceans,
either through applications or through the
design of equipment
and processes that will utilize the oceans. I
think this is the big area in the future where we'll
see a lot of it, mainly because of the limitations
the world is facing in resources, energy, and so
forth. They're going to turn to the oceans for a lot
of these, and that's going to be a wide open field
for the engineer out there. I guess it's
engineering in its broadest sense. Well, as a
matter of fact, I anticipated my second question,
which had to do with ocean engineering and the
environment. Would you assume that ocean
engineering, and your institution in
particular, will move more and more into what
amounts to eco-movements and eco-studies? Yes, I
think so.
Again, this is a trend that's happening
everywhere.
world is essentially driving us towards learning
more about the ocean as an ecosystem and taking
advantage of it I'm sure that as time goes on a
larger and larger fraction of our work here will be
in the quote the applied areas it's going to be on
problems that people are interested in for one
reason or another either for resources for
pollution or energy or something like that, that
more and more of our effort will go into that,
either directly or indirectly. Again, this is a
trend that is opposed by a good deal of our
scientists here, particularly the older group
again. They kind of like to see their grant come
from NSF, and they do their thing and continue
doing what they want to do. I don't think this is
going to be possible. The world is changing, and
people have to change with it. And that's the way
it's changing. toward the more applied. I think if
we're to survive as a first-rate institution,
we're going to have to change with the world.
Follow this. And do more applied research. Do more
applied. Do you think Sea Grant will play a larger
and larger role in funding applying?
Not necessarily. I think things like Sea Grant,
unless Sea Grant changes, I don't think that's
going to be necessarily the key thing.
But I think research of that general nature will
become more and more important. Now, it may grow
through Sea Grant. I don't know. With Ned Estenso
running Sea Grant, he's a very capable guy, and You
might be able to generate the funding and the
change of emphasis of Sea Grant so that that will
play a major role. Certainly those kinds of
research. I think that's a little shorter term
than I'm thinking about. I look at us getting in the
applied research, but the longer term applied
research than looking right at today's problems,
sort of anticipating tomorrow's problems. not
the far-out research that's just looking at the
understanding of what's going on, but the
longer-term problems. And I don't think Sea Grant
is putting an awful lot of its effort on that. I
think the IDOE is more closely related to those
kinds of things. It's somewhere in between those
two that I suspect will have a major impact in the
future.
I'm going to turn the tape over here.